NEW YORK LABOR LAW — KEY WAGE AND HOUR PROVISIONS
Selected sections relevant to wage theft claims
Jurisdiction: New York (NY)

SECTION 190 — DEFINITIONS
N.Y. Lab. Law § 190

As used in this article: 1. "Employee" means any person employed for hire by an employer in any employment. 2. "Employer" includes any person, corporation, limited liability company, or association employing any individual in any occupation, industry, trade, business or service. 3. "Manual worker" shall mean a mechanic, workingman, or laborer. 4. "Railroad worker" shall mean any person employed by a railroad corporation. 5. "Commission salesman" shall mean any employee whose principal activity is the selling of any goods, wares, merchandise, services, real estate, securities, insurance, or any article or thing and whose earnings are based, in whole or in part, on commissions. 6. "Wages" means the earnings of an employee for labor or services rendered, regardless of whether the amount of earnings is determined on a time, piece, commission or other basis. The term "wages" also includes benefits or wage supplements.

SECTION 193 — DEDUCTIONS FROM WAGES PROHIBITED
N.Y. Lab. Law § 193

1. No employer shall make any deduction from the wages of an employee, except deductions which: a. are made in accordance with the provisions of any law or any rule or regulation issued by any governmental agency; b. are expressly authorized in writing by the employee and are for the benefit of the employee, provided that such authorization is voluntary and only given following receipt by the employee of written notice of all terms and conditions of the payment and/or the benefit and that such deductions shall be limited to payments for: (i) insurance premiums and prepaid legal plans; (ii) pension or health and welfare benefits; (iii) contributions to a bona fide charitable organization; (iv) purchases made at events sponsored by a bona fide charitable organization affiliated with the employer where at least twenty percent of the profits from such event are being contributed to a bona fide charitable organization; (v) United States bonds; (vi) dues or assessments to a labor organization; (vii) scheduled payments on loans made by the employer to the employee; (viii) gym membership dues if the gym or fitness center is on the employer's premises; (ix) transportation, provided that such transportation is for the employee's benefit; and (x) similar payments for the benefit of the employee.

SECTION 195 — NOTICE AND RECORD KEEPING
N.Y. Lab. Law § 195

1. (a) Every employer shall notify its employees, in writing in English and in the language identified by each employee as the primary language of such employee, at the time of hiring, and on or before February first of each subsequent year of employment, of the following: the rate or rates of pay and basis thereof, whether paid by the hour, shift, day, week, salary, piece, commission, or other; allowances, if any, claimed as part of the minimum wage, including tip, meal, or lodging allowances; the regular pay day designated by the employer; the name of the employer; any "doing business as" names used by the employer; the physical address of the employer's main office or principal place of business, and a mailing address if different; the telephone number of the employer.

SECTION 198 — CIVIL ACTION FOR WAGE VIOLATIONS
N.Y. Lab. Law § 198

1-a. In any action instituted in the courts upon a wage claim by an employee or the commissioner in which the employee prevails, the court shall allow such employee to recover the full amount of any underpayment, all reasonable attorney's fees, prejudgment interest as required under the civil practice law and rules, and, unless the employer proves a good faith basis to believe that its underpayment of wages was in compliance with the law, an additional amount as liquidated damages equal to one hundred percent of the total amount of the wages found to be due, except such liquidated damages may be up to three hundred percent of the total amount of the wages found to be due for a willful violation of this article.

1-b. The statute of limitations for any cause of action to recover wages under this article shall be six years.

SECTION 652 — MINIMUM WAGE
N.Y. Lab. Law § 652

Every employer shall pay to each of its employees for each hour worked a wage of not less than: (a) for New York City and Nassau, Suffolk, and Westchester counties: on and after January 1, 2024, sixteen dollars and fifty cents ($16.50) per hour; (b) for the remainder of the state: on and after January 1, 2024, sixteen dollars ($16.00) per hour.

SECTION 663 — CIVIL PENALTY AND REMEDIES FOR MINIMUM WAGE VIOLATIONS
N.Y. Lab. Law § 663

1. If any employee is paid by his employer less than the wage to which he is entitled under the provisions of this article, he may recover in a civil action the amount of any such underpayment, together with costs and such reasonable attorney's fees as may be allowed by the court, and if such underpayment was willful, an additional amount as liquidated damages equal to one hundred percent of the total amount of the wages found to be due.

SECTION 215 — RETALIATION PROHIBITED (NEW YORK)
N.Y. Lab. Law § 215

1. (a) No employer or his or her agent, or the officer or agent of any corporation, partnership, or limited liability company, or any other person, shall discharge, threaten, penalize, or in any other manner discriminate or retaliate against any employee (i) because such employee has made a complaint to his or her employer, or to the commissioner or his or her authorized representative, that the employer has engaged in conduct that the employee, reasonably and in good faith, believes violates any provision of this chapter, or any order issued by the commissioner; (ii) because such employee has caused to be instituted a proceeding under or related to this chapter; (iii) because such employee has testified or is about to testify in such a proceeding; or (iv) because such employee has exercised rights protected under this chapter.

NEW YORK WAGE THEFT PREVENTION ACT
N.Y. Lab. Law § 195 et seq. (WTPA)

The New York Wage Theft Prevention Act requires employers to provide written notice to all employees at the time of hiring, and annually thereafter, of: the rate(s) of pay; the basis of pay (hour, shift, day, week, commission, etc.); any allowances claimed; the designated pay day; the employer's name; any DBA names; the physical address of the main office; and the employer's telephone number. Failure to provide the required notice results in damages of $50 per workday the violation occurred, up to $5,000.
